so that's what we to do and a few lines
up up everything I say that this is
angle B in the everybody good all right
so your album is like myself now but
it's on the way down we're gonna be like
[Music]
of all right now you're calling me
respect you
so I go oh I think I did enough fine
I want to fly I can say straw you'll be
my to do everybody
now got a set of plugin I know
okay
fire is one
just like hey Ellen oh okay so
yeah
oh there's a lot here in that world and
that is month for example well I think I
says but your computers will have to do
a new yeah
and this is the place another agency my
gonna pick up according to take us
inside that much but these one and we
count some every stuff I thought that
the total cost around weekend was now
right side each every chance my class
remember that
okay so two miles company which we just
got a better way to begin you probably
see that silence a permit other great
stuff we're gonna more time we're gonna
get success everyone just thought Mike
you didn't see how much do support and
these models gonna give you way up
suffering here I think about coming out
today are the medics geometric I'm sorry
but
is this
Sally my mistake is costing you to my
fun2draw words you know some things like
mark because my ex okay
but once you go ahead
so this is actually a pressure input
like melting table or some definite if
we hang on
so here we have that word and then
something centimeters and you know even
try know that's a day and that's what I
couldn't see it or its programs cuz I
think it'll be my undoing T's antics a
customer just mention my message I'll
get rid of this like cool so that's the
theories I might next time I next year's
actually it's fun
what's a recent model but I'm not so
these are almost effect leaves one
probably enemies
[Laughter]
and order and let's do
and you'll see how they said basically
your husband what's good that it's up
this way for us
but he's don't think we need to talk
about they don't and that's not even
worth their weight saying what is
between me and then for every time X
into one
no this time to this time and so the
other one and so there are reasons there
didn't hold up but just a lot of queries
are hunters and so awesome right there
were some funds and get out like no
excuse
how's it happen I guess okay yeah every
one of these people I think I can't
stick to people's house
yeah luckily I didn't only thing that's
gonna miss my compass but I don't like
look up things it's what though alright
all right is XY line based on three
weeks long story is about one point six
so this will be
and City Hall definitely
so the number of times
these are oh you want to know okay I
think my and then someone have some
husband's penis and some other young
have one or also we have
so they're sending us right here one
okay so you know I'm talking about so
it's here that's better I think yeah but
on about
he's different from us you're about to
get a success
yes
I'll be ready for it Thank You mr.
Howell actually points on I need to
compute e backers number nine
[Music]
all right so up here on this I'll tell
you about some of those permits it's on
the other tier
through the written word let's do one
this is what if Kalki is accompanied
right here super I think so not said one
there huh huh well that's in now before
so I'm gonna give me a boost
it's upwards and then record listen how
come you get a repertory no that was
funny dollars okay so that's a couple
diamond ring and he's not on the merits
anyway you know what I mean that's good
if you're so it's probably will run you
might well
but there's give me for this which is
miss cambrie yeah before you guys come
out and fun witness no and see how small
that is okay friends like your sport
little media corporate can you leverage
we saw just free
I mean these before you completed many
courses so business is on something
look at how much specifics on the other
today I'm sorry like let me - I'm sorry
Ely and then I went home
that's my mother promise see this
aluminum so put on the my kitchen sorry
for any occasions names and course in
2012 every other so you can you search
anything on my nose stretching
issues no any problems easy
so
you want your press a file one of the
people do is new and ready to set the
height to be done by different types and
and you say I'm tired I'm throwing I go
like why don't you mean you like that
it's constant time hit me I'm sorry miss
the point I mean which is the notion of
binary search a finding an element in an
array a specific element you could
obviously scan they raid and that would
take you time to find this item if there
happened to be sorted then you can find
this in logarithmic time using what's
called binary search okay and binary
search let's say you looking for a
specific item that's on a cake mine we
search roughly sleeping would work like
you go compare k2 again vo n over 2 and
beside give it a B if sorted you you get
to look at one half of their ring if BMI
number 2 is not exactly take then I use
it tactic a you're done otherwise but
you look at left half you do a divide
and conquer paradigm and you can do this
along with me time alright so keep this
in mind because binary search is going
off I in today's lecture and again in
other mixers it's really a and make
paradigm of the wedding baccarat for me
the sub-lists and it's actually take
something that's linear the linear
search in terms of you the logarithmic
search so those are a couple of problems
that become easy if you have a sorted
list and there's some not so obvious
applications I'm sorry
for example need a compression if you
wanted to compress a file one of the
things that you could do is do and it's
just that it's a set of values you could
do five you've been short items and that
automatically finds do this and you say
100 items rolling anymore
Frank you back because when you have a
big fake object in front but you want to
enter that first so you gotta worry
about everything that's polluted by this
big opaque object and that makes things
more efficient and so you keep things
sorted front to back most likely media
graphics rendering but some this time if
you're worried about transparency you
have to render things back to front so
typically you have solid lists
responding to the different objects both
orders both decreasing order and
decreasing order and you're meeting that
so sorting is up a real importance of
the team in pretty much an application
to look at so it's worthwhile you look
at the variety of sorting algorithms
that are out there and you're gonna do
is in several ones today but if you go
look at the opinion and your google
search there's all sorts of sorts like
cocktail sergeant by Tony Sarathy
and what have you and this reasons why
you can be sorting out this exists
because specific cases like they end up
with no response on nights of inputs nor
effects at all so let's take a look at
our first the purpose of the study
because I wasn't do is to analyze its
complexity perspective Allegan to figure
out how facets on running and what the
worst case complexity is so what is it
searches are for I was wanted to do been
given a sorted actually given an input
to be sorted let me don't do is the guy
insert a pie is the right position you
got a deal with that mirror
midway through the sorting process very
of sorted
a zero to y -1 and you can expand this
to does it ready to have Michaelis one
elements and I am is gonna get inserted
into the correct position and we do this
by care Y swaps position for that number
all right so let's go through an example
of this you know sergeant increasing
order
let's have six numbers five two four six
one three and you look at this and you
start with the index one or the second
element because the reddleman it's a
single element and it's already sorted
by definition but you start in here and
this is what we call our key and that's
a pointer do maybe read right now and if
he keeps will be to the right as we go
through the different steps available so
what you do is you look at this that you
have this is a am i that's your key and
you know a of zero to zero we just fly
and this if you want to start any
creasing water this is not sorted and so
we do a swap so what this we're doing
that in this step is to do a swap and we
go obtain two five four six one three so
all that's happened here in this step in
the way first step in the keys in the
second position is what once what is
what happened here and I'm for again you
need to put four into the right spot
until you don't paralyze swaps and in
this case you have to do one swap and
you get two for five and you're done
with this miss aggression so what
happens here is you have two four five
six one two three and now the keys over
here at six now just like things are
easy in the sense that you look at it
then you say well sixes I know that this
part is already sorted six is greater
than 5 so you have to do nothing so
there's nothing there's no swaps that
happens between the step
all that happens here is you're going to
move the key to one second right we have
two four five six one three and you but
here your work now you see one aspect of
the complexity of this algorithm given
that you're doing a wide swaths the way
this however that was defined in
pseudocode up there was I'm gonna use
pairwise swaps to find the correct
position
so what you're gonna do is you might
have to swap first 26 and then go swap
one is over here so you'll swap this
position in that position and it goes
well essentially new for swaps I do get
to the point where you have 1 4 2 4 5 6
3 so this is the result and understand
here is that you've been horse wants to
get one in the correct position imagine
a different data structure then you move
this over there and you shift them all
to the right but in fact the shifting of
these four elements is what any computer
in our model has four operations or four
steps anyway so there's no getting away
from the fact that you have to do four
things here and the way in such a sort
of the code that we have to insertion
sort
that's this is my using Paradise Lost so
drama's done now we have the key the
last step and what happens here is three
is going to get 12 with six I can then
three need to get swapped with five and
then three nice against walking with
four and then since 3 is greater than 2
and so it houses how many steps do I
have
yeah how many steps do I have
I get that was that I know wasn't that a
good question
yeah if I think of a step as being a
moment o makki how many steps do I have
steps and in this case you can think of
it as as a minus one steps since you
started with two unless it's on a beta n
steps in terms of positions and you're
right it is n square because at any
given step it's quite possible that I
have to do theta n work and one example
is this one right here where I have you
do for swaps and in general you can
construct a scenario where um towards
the end of the algorithm are you have to
stay in work but if you had unless that
was universe on it you would essentially
have to do on an average n by 2 swaps as
you go to each of the steps and that's
theta n so each step swaps okay
and I say swaps I can also say each step
is Theta n compares and swaps alright
and this might be important and then I
ask you an interesting question in a
minute but let me summarize what I have
here is a P n square although the reason
this is the beta n square though is
because steps and each step is good and
then I counted what do i what am i
counting in terms of operations but it's
not in there unspoken assumption is
being that an operation is a compare and
as well and they've actually equal in
cost
okay in most computers that's true you
have a single instruction and say that X
xx up in the context room I can do a
compare and the same thing for swapping
registers so perfectly reasonable
assumption that compares and swaps for
numbers are have exactly the same cost
but he had a record and you are
comparing records and the comparison
function that you use for the records
was in itself a method call or a
subroutine is one possible then all
you're doing is is pointers are
references to do okay
so I called it binary search up here
okay and so if you pick insertion sort
and you can start trivially turn it into
theta n log n now if you're talking
about any the number of hips okay and
that is to say you know what plays this
big binary search and you can do that
the key observation because zero it's
already so right and so you can do my
research on that part of the guy right
so let's just write that down do a
binary search which is already sorted
essentially they could have theta log by
time and pretty to go steps and so then
you get your beta n log n but
and that complexity of it so so binary
search in insertion sort is to theta n
log n for compares but it still dating
square for swaps
alright okay good so as you see this is
called binary insertions or because it
does my research and insertion sort is
the one that we have a code born in the
doctors program already one that dr.
Scott's so let's move on and my talk
about duck and different down with them
so when you like to do the other classes
very fine
Hebrew fossil batteries and get 10% to
5% to 1% and so on so forth but to stick
to improving and then we know it's a
very pretty young um it's a standard
recursion
first of all look similar to mine
research
let me do here we split it into L & R
and essentially do good work
really I think John's open the Elat are
in the sense that we just Paul keeps
links but he's putting all the work is
gotten down the bottom and the fatigue
emerged if you're emerging a pair of
elements and believes and then we merge
two pairs and get more elements and
maybe March to and go on the way up so
there's no real explicit code but you
can see that there's LF L Prime
it happens really later there's no real
sorting code here it happens it merger D
and you'll see that quite clearly when
you don't do an example so you have a
larger deal Prime you know if I'm in our
prime and what we end up getting is a
sorted array okay and you have a what
kind of merge routine that takes L prime
in our prime and merges them into the
side of the Ring
so the top level what you see is split
into two and you emerge and get this on
your right put is of size n do you have
two arrays of size n over two
these are two sorted arrays so if you
want follow the recursive execution of
this in a small example then you'll be
able to see how this works and then do
it
Freddy say for example Minh eight
elements so the top level let me get
there March is going to assume that you
have two sorted arrays and Marja
together
that's the invariant in words are
orphans routine it is young same puts
are sort of Ellen R and it actually I
should say L prime in our prime so let
say your 2013 7 & 2
you have 12 11 9 and 1 and this would be
L Prime
and this would be our crime um what you
have is looking for the two-finger
around with them and so you got two
figures and injure them point to
something and in this case mother is
fine you can L my left finger is wanting
to help Ryan or some element in out
Brian my my figure is pointing to some
element in our crime and I'm compared
the two elements that my fingers are
pointing to do and I'm going to choose
in this case this one of those elements
and if I put them into this sorted array
okay so cut off here I look at that and
then I compared to two and one and
riches while I want a smaller so I'm
gonna write one dumb this is to think
around with emerge everyone don't put
one across up one
so effectively what happens is never to
suck of that to suppress it up and I
think it moves up dude tonight okay turn
on pointing and two and nine and I
repeat the step right so now this gets
to a smaller so I'm gonna go ahead and
write two down and I can cross out too
and my finger up two to seven all right
and so that's it I won't bore you with
the rest of the steps it's actually I'm
walking up you have a couple pointers
and you're walking up please do erase
and you're writing down one through
seven nine eleven twelve thirteen twenty
okay and that's your pod routine and all
of the work really is done in the merge
routine because I look at that the body
is simply and recursive call you have to
go be split there a but that's fairly
straightforward if you have any rain and
this would be our prime um what you have
is what we call a two finger down with
them and so you got two figures and each
of them point to something and in this
case mother was pointing to L my left
finger is pointing to L prime or some
element of L prime I might figure is
pointing to some element in our crime
and I may compare the two elements that
my fingers are pointing to and I'm going
to choose in this case this one of those
elements and if I put them into this
sorted array okay so start lucky here uh
look at that and that and I compared to
n1 and Mitch's mother want a smaller so
I'm gonna write one down this is a to
think around with merge and put one
don't put one Don I have a cross up one
so effectively what happens is notice up
of that it's across without and I think
do the ninth okay it's a non pointing at
two and nine and I repeat this step
right so now in this case two is smaller
so I'm gonna go ahead and write two down
and I'm cross out too and my finger up
to two cell all right and so that's it I
won't bore you with the rest of the
steps it's essentially a walking
you have a couple of hunters and you're
walking up these two arrays and you're
running down 1 2 7 9 11 12 13 20 okay
and that's your quad routine and all the
work really is done in the merge routine
because other than that the body is
simply and recursive call and you have
to obviously split their rate but that's
fairly straightforward if you have any
rain or even you can imagine that you
set L you know to be a zero n by 2 minus
1 and are similarly and so you're just
put it halfway in the middle and I'll
talk about a little bit more disassembly
associated with that let me get to in
giving us but to finish up in terms of
the computation on works on this is it
the market is doing most if not all of
the work and this two-finger algorithm
is going to be able to take two sorted
arrays and put them into a single sort a
great by just first thing or engine
leaving these elements and what that
lets the emerge if I have two arrays of
size n over 2 here so so far so good
it's a little I know you know the answer
as to what that the quantity of merge
sort is but I'm guessing that most of
you won't even prove it to me because I
got a hard guy to prove something to
anyway but and I don't believe you ever
understand right so so it's it's
kampachi and you've said this before in
class and I think I mentioned it the
overall complexity of this algorithm is
theta n log n ok and where did that come
from how do you prove that and so what
we do about is take a look at mercs are
and we'll look at the recursion tree
we're trying the me is approving the
purchase orders theta n log n and the
way we going to do this is I put some
proof by picture and it's not establish
proof technique but it's something that
is very helpful to get any intuition
behind behind proof and why the result
is true right so and you can always take
that need to formalize it and make this
for return stolen so Graeme right right
now is that we have a dividing point
around oh that has a bird step
let's beta n and so if I just look at
this rupture that I have here I can
write and recurrence for much sorry that
looks like this
when I say complexity I could say T of n
which is the work done for nios is
maybe some constant time in order to
divide their a so this would be the part
corresponding dividing their rate and
there's two problems of size n over two
and so I have two T of n over two and
this is a recursive part and I have C
times n it's the first part which is
what we have n complexity so you have a
recurrence like this and and I know you
some of you have seen differences in six
over two and you know how to solve this
what I like to do is show you this 33
expansion then I apparently tells you
how to solve this recurrence but also
gives you a means of solving recurrences
where instead of adding C of n you have
something else out here you have F of n
which is a different function from the
linear function and this recursion tree
is the the simplest way of arguing the
theta n log n complexity of merge sort
and so what I'll do is append this
returns out and let's do that over there
so I'm see a head on top um I'm ready
car this Monsen factor because C of n
dominates so I just talked to see event
I make things up as a new personal so
I'm gonna go see a pen and the top level
that's the work I have to do with the
merge at the top level and then when I
go down to two small problems need to
that size n over two so I don't see a
seat I'm Sam accused me you like my
kubera so there's just constant see it
just represents anyone right Thetas up
here you could say little more about
that later but but think of the CN as
under sending that data and complexity
and C is constant so see how C times n
TR see you times and over to here and
then I keep going I see up C times n
over four C times n over four and so on
and so forth and come down all the way
here and it eventually become one
actually a constant a bunch of C's here
alright so there's another question I'd
like you to answer someone tell me what
the number of levels of the screen you
are precisely and the number of leaves
of this tree are precisely yep log in
with my mother base to do like one and
release your right to Greta okay so 1
plus log and leaves one you know even do
you have you don't do a single element
which is by definition sorted and you
have enemies right so now let's add up
to work right so this is I really like
this picture because it's just so
intuitive in terms of getting us the
result that we're looking for X so you
add up the working each of them each of
the levels of the streak alright so the
top level to see n the second level is
CN
denied at half in half see ya see ya Wow
well symmetry okay so I kept doing the
same want to work modulo the costing
factors here but what's going on to do
the same one is mimic north but roughly
the same I work each of the levels right
and now you know how many levels there
are it's 1 plus log n so if you want to
write an equation for T of N
it's 1 plus log in times CFM [__]
data oh and some of you alright so I've
mixed in constant C and paid us and then
the purposes of this description
interchangeable you will see recurrences
that look like this in class and things
like that
I'm confused it's just a constant
magnitude a factor in front of the
function that you have and it's a little
easier I think to write down these
constant factors and realize that
they're my work done is you say energy
to the weaves and how much you know the
dimensions of this 3 in terms of levels
and in terms of the number of weeks you
got there
you get yourself alright so we put the
two outcomes of our insertion sort if
you well what number is this data and
square for swamps learned so I theta n
log n he doesn't not interesting
question what is one advantage of
insertion sort over birdsong yeah
what I mean
that's exactly right nothing that way so
the two guys who answered the questions
before but that levels in you come on
company after class so that's a great
answer by it's in place so name here's
something that has to do with auxiliary
space and so what you see here and it's
in here but the fact of the matter is
that you've had L Prime and R Prime and
L Prime and R prime are different from L
at our before the initial halves of the
inputs to the sodium atom right and what
I said here this that's what this
picture shows this a sorted array a and
so you have to make a copy of the array
in the two halves L at are in order to
do the recursion and then to take the
results and put them into the solid or a
a so you needed a MARSOC you needed data
and auxiliary space extra space and the
definition of in place sorry implies
that you have Tier one mustn't auxiliary
space okay observe a space for insertion
sort is simply the temporary variable
that you need when you swap two elements
- pop a couple registers you can store
values and it's a communication over I
gather it cetera and that's the theta1
of summary stage for insertion sort
so there's advantage of the version of
overbook so did you have a billion
elements
potentially something you want to sort
of memory do I do something really fast
and so everything in in cash or main
memory and you want to sort millions are
many even trillions of items this
becomes an important consideration I
will say that you can reduce a constant
factor of the data end so in the scheme
a copy of their a certain elements you
actually have M extras
I know to storage you can make that n or
two but that's simple coding trick by by
keeping one half okay
the throw away Monta Ellis at one of
ours and it's getting down to n over two
and I thought it's a reasonable thing to
do we have a billion elements and you
want to reduce your your story is my
constant factor so that's one going
great now turns out that you actually go
further and there's a fairly
sophisticated out of them that some
other spots at 206 that's an in-place
merge sort
and this in-place merge sort is gonna be
practical in the sense that it doesn't
do any well if you jump with the
constant factors a while it's in place
and it's still theta n log n problem is
they've done that the running time of
in-place merge sort is much worse then
they're making record start that uses
theta end of Surrey space so people
doesn't use in place much artistic make
paper it's ready to read and it's a
analysis it's sophisticated for double-o
sex everyone you want go there but it
does exist so you take more sort as one
let you know that you can do things in
place in terms of numbers so experiments
we ran a few years ago so he's been on
being completely developed if we don't
have to give your numbers but Mozart in
Python if you write down a little
perfect program to do this is to point
to n log n microseconds okay for a given
n right so this is the Marshall
Argentine and if you look at searching
sort in Python that's something like
point two and square microseconds okay
so you see some awesome factors here if
you do in certain sergeant see it's
justified language then it's much faster
but twenty times faster in 2001 and
square microseconds so look at a
practice on the side we do ask you to
write code and this is important then we
can finish it in evidence is because
people one run and what you can see on
is that you can actually find an N so
redundant Python or C this or I tells
you that hasn't Ronnie complexity is
pretty important at once n gets beyond
about four thousand you're going to see
that much sergeant Python the Salton Sea
right so so the constant factors I get
so soon
beyond certain values of M so that's why
isn't talking like speed is important
I'm do have a factor 20 here but that
doesn't mean you don't so keeping them
it's imperative or longer and then fall
to be on all right okay
so that's one way to cover for something
so hopefully have a sensitive [__] what
happens and then these new sorting
algorithms I look at the very different
sorting out in the next I'm using heaps
this is a different data structure I'm
the last thing I want to do
lactis give you a little more intuition
as the recurrence solving I based on
this diagram that I wrote up there and
so we're gonna use exactly the structure
and you're gonna look at a couple of
different recurrences they don't really
motivate and don'ts of it coming
especially gal with them but I just
write out the recurrence and I look at
the you look at the recursion tree for
that and I'm trying tease out of you the
complexity associated with these
recurrences so let's take a look at TF n
equals 2 T of n over 2 plus C n square C
times n let's see when you can write so
you how me merge dirty and it was taking
n square and you put it up wrong that'll
be a big motivation for this occurrence
but it's way to the parents gonna come
on
alright so what is this vertically would
like well it looks kind of the up CN
square OC u squared divided by 4 cm
square divided by 4 CN square by 16 that
levels in the leaves are exactly the
same
eventually n is gonna go out to one side
you will see see all the way here n
leaves and you will have as before one
plus log n levels everything is the same
right and this is Twilight this
recursive tree formulation so much
because now all I have to do is add up
the work associated with each of the
levels to get the solution to the curves
right CN square CN square divided by 2
cm square divided by 4 and this is n
times sweep right so what does that add
up to yeah yeah exactly exactly right so
if you look at what happens here this
dominates all the other things actually
listen that okay and you say bounded by
2 cm square because this start is modify
cm squared and already have cm square up
at the top right so this particular
algorithm that response is talking about
sort of ever this returns came from is I
theta n square algorithm and in this
case all the work done is the root at
the top level of recursion okay here it
was roughly equal amount of work done in
each of the different levels all right
here all the work was done
all right so the following content is
provided under a Creative Commons
license
your support will help MIT
OpenCourseWare continue to offer high
quality educational resources for free
one of the cutest look at the
instructors that was ever invented
called the heat and we're going to use
the key as an example implementation of
a priority queue and can also use heaps
you build a sorting algorithm called
heapsort that is very very different
from either insertion sort or merge sort
and it has a nice properties that
neither insertion sort normal sort tab
but what am i do is get started okay
motivating the heap data structure with
Allah so whether you can sit in sorting
or not so the notion of priority queue I
think makes intuitive sense to all of
you it's essentially a structure that
implements accept
as you can imagine if I already can use
something where you queue up for
something you buy something you want to
sell something you have certain
priorities assigned to you and I don't
pick already you want able to delete it
from the queue
so all of these operations are
interesting operations that should run
fast and for some definition of fast
obviously again it shouldn't asymptotic
complexity definition of fast in that
case you'll be saying does this
operation run in order n time order log
n time etc so in general I think for the
next few lectures you're going to see a
specification of instructor operations
with respect to the abstract editor we
spent a lot of time on has its
complexity or the efficiency of
operations on the after I did it right
here in the below 6 you'll specify this
ATT and specifying self operations or
methods to ADT and login to virtually
and compare and contrast different
entities so whenever the batik and those
are insert SS so you have a set of
elements guess and you want able to
insert element X s not able to do max of
S which is
and difference on max of X s murder is
extract max of s which none of it
returns the element with a not just key
but also from that stone so this is you
have a queue and and the person in the
queue was serviced with helmet in the
queue was serviced and then removed from
the queue finally you can imagine
changing the priority of a particular
element X in the set s and s reality
there's an Associated a key as we have
up there with each element and that T is
called K and increase key s X K would
decrease the value of x st to a new
value k
okay quick response to is just all
increase most of the time so increasing
the value in a familiar particular
application you can have certainly a
decrease key and you have to know what
the biggest value was and it's just a
matter of exactly what operation you
wanna perform if it called an update and
on increment where we let I'm gonna
spend most of the time here talking
about how you maintain a rep invariant
of this data structure called the key
that allows you to do these operations
in an efficient way and we talked about
what efficiency is and we try and
analyze the efficiency of these
algorithms of you put up alright so
let's talk about heat and heat there's a
limitation of a priority view it's
amazingly and there is structure except
that you're visualizing this array as a
nearly complete binary tree and so what
does I mean exactly well the best way to
understand that is by looking at an
example
[Music]
and eight seven so some type of elements
didn't random water dirty box sorted and
I'm looking at the indices elements I'm
gonna visualize this as a nearly
complete binary tree it's not a cool
bi-weekly elements in it of an arbitrary
size the way and so that's why we have a
nearly complete here so what does it
mean to visualize this as a tree
well index one is the root of the tree
and that's item with the value 16 and
this is two and three and nine and 10
are different up above four and five in
this case so that's the picture you want
to keep in your head for the rest of
this lecture any time you see an array
you say they're looking at the heap
representation of the array the picture
on the right I don't see what it looks
like and so these do a couple so you
have ten here and a seven so that's so
what might be structure is that you have
a key representation off an array and
I'll let you do it
look at the tree the parent of I is I or
to the left child I is to I and the
right child so that's essentially what
this map is one key now on top of that
how can we just wait and people just
wants to do we're going to have
particular types of peeps that befall
max heaps and minis and as you can
imagine max additional properties on top
of the key
and the maxi probably you have this true
for every node in the tree and example
leaves of the tree but they they're not
children respond to the week so that's a
to your property but at higher levels
you're gonna have children and check
that look at this example here I think I
system is holding out on time and
setting the air and six would be nine
and have three over there and then two
or one so we can look at this and and
check whether it has the Maxie property
or not
Maxie property see ya all you have to do
is look at I want denotes one two three
indices index four five six
it's a concern because they're having
children I'd like you to start with the
two five here and they go the parent is
greater than or equal to P child in the
gaze of you know five and so you have
the maxi Crockett fairly straightforward
property
and imagine defining the minty property
in an equivalent way
alright this we place the greater than
or equal to bit less than or equal so
right off the bat what operation is
going to be trivially performed on
asking the question yep defined anyway
max operation
now what about expressmax is that
trivially to fall on a maxi no because
what do I mean by that if I when you say
and max accumulate before what it means
is that you can return the max you can
find the maximum element or maximum
element and you obviously got Wi-Fi to
be and in general this goes back to its
reppin variants with that to mention
already you typically want to maintain
this rapid million in a structure in
this case in the maxi property okay so
do I maintain the Maxine property as we
modify the V so to go over one to
another
you start the maxi one end with a maxi
okay and it makes perfect sense because
I'm one of simple things that you I do
thank you is to create a priority queue
anyone be able to run extract max on
priority do over in Norway right and
what that means is that you think might
be doing it and they go all right and
Mike you did that you would get assorted
developments in property that we could
patchouli one extract max on it
fantastic
all right so a big question that really
means is hardly maintain the maxi
property as we modify the be okay and
how would you go the other question the
time answer is
okay so if I'm sorting and there's
another thing that's missing here then
you have to work on which is how are you
going to build a maxi out of initially
unsorted array right it's me or may not
turn into a maxi this trivially happened
to be exactly the right thing because I
picked it and it don't do a Maximus I
visualizing it but it's quite possible
that you're gonna raise their song okay
sometimes he's planning to you a bunch
of different methods can you fall
underneath and all of these methods are
in order not entertaining order right I
guess if I pretty much anything
so the correct a single violation of the
heap property subtree okay and I'll
explain what I mean with that in just a
minute so Mac signify is the fundamental
operation that we have done changes
anybody music over and over
what does is take something no not a
heat not a backseat now that they got a
heat from now on forget that I'm saying
got a maxi we don't gonna be talking
about maxi for the rest of this lecture
okay and what Mac signify does is take
something that is not quite a maxi you
contacted a beverage it's going to take
something where there's a single
violation of this
[Music]
I guess simply their rate and I think
this I think and I think white is
willing to crash and condition is
violated in Mexico but as a precondition
is true then what you have to do is you
have to return a maxi correcting this
line makes all right that's the contract
so that's a good example I think what I
want to do is start with the shuttle be
there I wanna just I want to see all
it's definitely family run max-heapify
and let's take a look at 16 or
and I brought the indices for this first
example and then I my mother so there
you go if there's a maxi no because
right here
I'm not problem four is less than 14
therefore I have a violation right and
so I look at the tall max-heapify to